---
title: Two Brains
---

In the 1980s, an Oxford literary scholar and philosopher, Iain McGilchrist, was troubled by the fact that his age's approach to literary scholarship felt so analytical, disembodied, and lacking in emotional nuance. In an effort to get closer to the body, he decided to retrain in medicine. He ended up specializing in psychiatry, and becoming a neuroimaging researcher at Johns Hopkins. While there, he focused his work on the differences between the right and left hemispheres of the human brain. 

Researchers at the time told him that this was a career dead-end. The pop-psychology conception of the left and right brain (the left brain is logical; the right brain creative), which had been popular during the 1960s and 70s, had largely been debunked. Both hemispheres, experts said, work together on most things (and this is still believed to be true — at least in people whose brains are uninjured, and working in the way that science assumes to be "normal"). But McGilchrist was drawn to research being done on patients who had sustained localized injuries to one hemisphere or the other, and were therefore functioning primarily with only one half of their brains. 

McGilchrist noticed that people who had left-hemisphere injuries struggled with speech, and certain mechanical tasks. But they could still relate to other human beings, appreciate beautiful music, literature, and nature, and understand subtle emotional context. People who had injured the right-hemisphere, on the other hand, struggled less with speech, and could complete more practical tasks. But they had lost the ability understand nuance. In a way, they started to think more like machines, becoming inclined to lump things into broad categories, as their perspectives became more disembodied, and disconnected from larger contexts. They also became more self-interested, and had trouble relating to humans and other living things in an intersubjective way (in other words, as two conscious minds relate). They started relating to everything outside of themselves as if it were a lifeless object. 

This led McGilchrist and his fellow researchers to ask the question: since the hemispheres ideally do need to work together to function, then why are they so physically divided in the first place? Wouldn't more connections always be better, and keep us more resilient in the face of these kinds of injuries? What is the evolutionary benefit of the disconnect?

The answer they came up with is that we are often called on to complete two incompatible tasks at the same time. One of these tasks will likely entail focusing narrowly on something that we want to get, hunt, or construct. But if we use this kind of attention only, we will miss everything else going on around us. We need an additional kind of attention working at the same time, taking in the larger context, responding to the world, its people, animals, plants and dangers, in nuanced and embodied ways. 

In his 2009 book *The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World*, McGilchrist combines ideas from his literary studies with the findings from the neuroimaging studies on the divided brain. He proposes the theory that, throughout most of human evolution, the right hemisphere of the brain was essentially in the lead (in his nomenclature, "the master") while the left hemisphere of the brain was there to assist with practical tasks ("the emissary"). But at some point in European history, their roles got reversed. The narrowly focused, mechanical left brain took control, and pushed the more holistic, compassionate right brain to the side. This accelerated during the Industrial Revolution — when machines, a left brain creation, became so powerful, and spread around the Earth.

In a way, this theory meshes cleanly with Pyne's theory of second and third fire. Second fire exists in an intersubjective relationship with human beings, and feels like the product of a right-hemisphere dominant way of existing in the world. As Amy Cardinal Christianson, an Indigenous fire expert in Canada, says: "We coexist with fire, we need fire and fire needs us. It's a different way of looking at the forest." 

Third fire, on the other hand, and the machines in which it burns, feel like the products of the left hemisphere of the brain, and the amnesiac cultures which, as Pyne explains, lost their "felt" (embodied) sense of how to relate to fire — saw it as "a good servant, but bad master." Similarly, you could argue that the urge to "protect" trees for economic reasons is driven by the left-brain's self-interest, and sense that it is entitled to profit from the objects in the world around it; while the urge to suppress all wildfire is the left-brain urge to fight and control what it cannot understand, what frightens it.

Experts in trauma are also researching the differences between the left and right hemispheres of the brain, and how they manifest in traumatized people. When a person is traumatized — particularly if they were traumatized in childhood — whole regions of their brain may go dark on a brain scan, while other regions light up. This goes some way toward answering the question put by Thenon (observer of the 'lullaby boy') about why some people remain cool in terrifying situations, while others end up panicked, or singing in the stream. It may have to do with the ways that trauma in childhood — or a lack thereof — shaped their brain.

When we experience something terrifying, experts say, it is immediately stored by the back right brain — the part that stores raw, unfiltered emotion. This part of the brain is so fast that we may never even process an experience consciously, before it is stowed away there, in darkness. 

This is a phenomenon that many now are familiar with — the suppression of traumatic memories. Yet, this instinct for suppression, though helpful in the short-term, can often lead to problems with memory, amnesia, and to explosive, erratic, or destructive behavior in the future. In that way, the suppression of trauma feels like a direct analogy — as well as an explanation — for the suppression of fire. 

In order to be processed, traumatic memories have to be unlocked from the back of the right brain and processed through the fronts of our right and left hemispheres — this is how we contextualize them, place them in the past, and, ultimately, make sense of them as a part of the ongoing narrative of our lives. Both hemispheres need to work together on this in order for it to be accomplished.

But in traumatized people, the hemispheres have even fewer connections than they do in others. The front of the right hemisphere tends to show up unusually dark on brain scans. With this pathway blocked, the front of the left brain can no longer makes sense of emotions in context. When it feels the fear emanating from the back of the right hemisphere — what we might call a flashback — all it can do is invent a story in order to keep itself safe. This story is usually driven by a mixture of terror and self-interest. 

When we try to understand fire with the frightened, disoriented, left-hemisphere alone, we see it as the enemy, the object. We lose all conception of a past in which we might have existed in a different relationship to it. We decide that it is encroaching on our communities, our homes, and that we are entitled to control it. The extreme, reactionary, 10 a.m. policy, in response to the Great Fire of 1910, makes some sense in this light.

Unfortunately, when we sever ourselves from the past — opt for total suppression — we also lose any ability we might have had to predict the future. We exist on a free floating island of what feels like an unprecedented present. It may begin to seem like anything could happen. Like everything might burn.

In the end of his account, Thenon explains: "The cook's condition had improved so much that he had no further need of attention from us. However, he did not get back to a normal state while here, but I was informed some weeks later that he had entirely recovered."

Of the other, we get only a sentence.

"The 'lullaby boy' was taken to an asylum." 
